---
title: Rhai 0.2 release
---

I've just updated [Rhai](https://github.com/jonathandturner/rhai) to 0.2.  This release focuses on improving the interaction between Rhai and Rust.  The result is a cleaner, easier-to-use API.  This new API does mean some API breakages, so you'll need to update your code to work with 0.2.

With this release, Rhai also now has arrays as a built-in type.

You can upgrade/install Rhai from [cargo](https://crates.io/crates/rhai).

# API improvements

Rhai 0.2 has a lot of small improvements that give it a much more natural feel in Rust.  The main three areas are function registration, getters/setter helpers, and simpler eval.

## Function registration

Function registration now works through method calls on the engine, and we can infer the expected function type.  The end result is generally much cleaner.

__[Before]__

```rust
fn add(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 { x + y }

//...

&(add as fn(x: i32, y: i32)->i32).register(&mut engine, "add");
```

__[Now]__

```rust
fn add(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 { x + y }

//...

engine.register_fn("add", add);
```

## Getter/setter helpers

To help cut down on repetition, Rhai 0.2 has a few helpers for working with getters and setters.

__[Before]__

```rust
&(TestStruct::get_x as fn(&mut TestStruct)->i32).register(&mut engine, "get$x");
&(TestStruct::set_x as fn(&mut TestStruct, i32)->()).register(&mut engine, "set$x");
```

__[Now]__

```rust
engine.register_get_set("x", TestStruct::get_x, TestStruct::set_x);
```


## Simpler eval

Eval will now take the expected return type as a type parameter, letting you cut out a few steps.  We've also moved to using &str rather than String for eval inputs.

__[Before]__

```rust
if let Ok(result) = engine.eval("40 + 2".to_string()).unwrap().downcast::<i32>() {}
```

__[Now]__

```rust
if let Ok(result) = engine.eval::<i32>("40 + 2") {}
```

# New feature: arrays

In addition to the API improvements, Rhai now has a built-in array type.  

```rust
var y = [1, 2, 3]; 
y[1] = 5; 

print(y[1]);
```

# Thanks!

Thanks for the feedback on Rhai's first release.  Also, big thanks to [@nikomatsakis](https://twitter.com/nikomatsakis), who gave me a few key pointers on how improve the API.

Looking forward to hearing from you. 